Update docs for eager rent collection (#10348)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/apps/README.md

# Programming Model

> An _app_ interacts with a Solana cluster by sending it _transactions_ with one or more _instructions_. The Solana _runtime_ passes those instructions to _programs_ deployed by app developers beforehand. An instruction might, for example, tell a program to transfer _lamports_ from one _account_ to another or create an interactive contract that governs how lamports are transfered. Instructions are executed sequentially and atomically for each transaction. If any instruction is invalid, all account changes in the transaction are discarded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _app_ interacts with a Solana cluster by sending it _transactions_ with one or more _instructions_. The Solana _runtime_ passes those instructions to _programs_ deployed by app developers beforehand. An instruction might, for example, tell a program to transfer _lamports_ from one _account_ to another or create an interactive contract that governs how lamports are transferred. Instructions are executed sequentially and atomically for each transaction. If any instruction is invalid, all account changes in the transaction are discarded.
```

![SDK tools](../.gitbook/assets/sdk-tools.svg)

As shown in the diagram above, a program author creates a program and compiles it to an ELF shared object containing BPF bytecode and uploads it to the Solana cluster with a special _deploy_ transaction. The cluster makes it available to clients via a _program ID_. The program ID is a _public key_ specified when deploying and is used to reference the program in subsequent transactions.

A program may be written in any programming language that can target the Berkley Packet Filter \(BPF\) safe execution environment. The Solana SDK offers the best support for C/C++ and Rust programs, which are compiled to BPF using the [LLVM compiler infrastructure](https://llvm.org).

## Storing State between Transactions

> If the program needs to store state between transactions, it does so using _accounts_. Accounts are similar to files in operating systems such as Linux. Like a file, an account may hold arbitrary data and that data persists beyond the lifetime of a program. Also like a file, an account includes metadata that tells the runtime who is allowed to access the data and how.

Author: This is my two cents. I split this rather long section into pieces and arranged some flow. Added some more information.

I needed this changes for smoother introduction of _accounts_ and its resultant _rent_ for this pr's purpose.

![SDK tools](../.gitbook/assets/sdk-tools.svg)

> As shown in the diagram above, a program author creates a program and compiles it to an ELF shared object containing BPF bytecode and uploads it to the Solana cluster with a special _deploy_ transaction. The cluster makes it available to clients via a _program ID_. The program ID is a _public key_ specified when deploying and is used to reference the program in subsequent transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the diagram above, a program author creates a program and compiles it to an ELF shared object containing BPF bytecode and uploads it to the Solana cluster with a special _deploy_ transaction. The cluster makes it available to clients via a _program ID_. The program ID is a _address_ specified when deploying and is used to reference the program in subsequent transactions.
```

In the same way that a Linux user uses a path to look up a file, a Solana client uses _addresses_ to look up accounts. The address is usually plain a 256-bit public key and presented as Base58 on user interfaces. To create an account with a public key, the client generates a _keypair_ and registers its public key using the `CreateAccount` instruction with preallocated fixed storage size in bytes. In fact, the account address can be arbitrary 32-bytes binary. As such there is a mechanism for derived addresses for advanced use (`CreateAccountWithSeed`).

## Ownership of Accounts and Assignment to Programs

The created account is initialized to be _owned_ by a built-in program called the System program and is called a _system account_ aptly. An account includes "owner" metadata. The owner is a program ID. The runtime grants the program write access to the account if its ID matches the owner. For the case of the System program, the runtime allows clients to transfer lamports and importantly _assign_ account ownership, meaning changing owner to different program ID. If an account is not owned by a program, the program is only permitted to read its data and credit the account.

> Also, if an account is marked "executable" in metadata, it will only be used by a _loader_ to run programs. Moreover, programs are just executable accounts owned by a _loader_. For example, a BPF-compiled program is marked executable and loaded by the BPF loader when executing its transactions. This is like a file in a sense that the `ls` command is just an executable file and loaded by the `ld` loader. However, no program is allowed to modify the contents of an executable account once deployed unlike a file as a blockchain security assumption.

Reviewer: I preferred the previous simplicity of this section. I don't think we need to explain the details of the System Program here; it was just used as an example of ownership.
That said, we may want a separate page that details how to use the System Program to set up and manage accounts for program use.

Author: Yeah, I might have gone too much details. Reverted!
